https://mnre.gov.in/en/pradhan-mantri-kisan-urja-suraksha-evam-utthaan-mahabhiyaan-pm-kusum/ | HTTP 200 | fetched at 2026-10-10T09:42:15.859Z | sha256 2bca1a2962b30cd3f25561e567c6ef8f2c9b8038d766568961274c9cda8ade23 | Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyaan (PM KUSUM) | MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY | India
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyaan (PM KUSUM) | MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY | India Search Search Accessibility Tools Accessibility Tools --> Color Contrast High Contrast Normal Contrast Highlight Links Invert Saturation Text Size Font Size Increase Font Size Decrease Normal Font Text Spacing Line Height Other controls --> Screen Reader --> Hide Images Big Cursor हिन्दी भारत सरकार GOVERNMENT OF INDIA नवीन एवं नवीकरणीय ऊर्जा मंत्रालय MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY Menu Toggle More Home About Us Introduction Who’s Who Institutes & Organizations Autonomous Institutes Sardar Swaran Singh National Institute of Bio Energy National Institute of Solar Energy National Institute of Wind Energy Public Sector Undertakings Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (IREDA) Solar Energy Corporation of India Limited (SECI) Association of Renewable Energy Agencies of States (AREAS) Programmes & Divisions Bio Energy Energy Storage Systems(ESS) Green Energy Corridors Rajbhasha Division Human Resource Development Hydrogen International Relations Lab Policy, Standards and Quality Control New Technologies Research & Development Small Hydro Power Solar Thermal Solar Wind Notices Career Recruitments Current Notices Tenders Statistics Physical Achievements Renewable Energy Installed Capacity Metadata Advance Release Calendar Renewable Energy RE-Statistics 2025 -26 RE-Statistics 2024-25 RE-Statistics 2023-24 Metadata Advance Release Calendar Knowledge Center Reports Akshay Urja Magazine Annual Reports Other Reports Resources Backlog Vacancy Blacklisted Entities Demand for Grant Designated Authority and Nodal officer Empowering Women in Renewable Energy Events ICGH-2026: Explore Agenda & Register International Conference on Hydrogen(ICGH 23) Bharat RE Summit & Expo Other Events Feedback Gallery Photo(s) Podcast(s) Video(s) Parliament Questions Lok Sabha Rajya Sabha Physical Achievements Latest Archive Public Grievances Policies and Regulations Recruitment Rules DRE Livelihood Right to Information Citizen charters Vigilance Portals Akshay Urja Portal Biogas Portal BioUrja Portal CCDC Wind Human Resource Development Portal IRIX Portal National Green Hydrogen Mission Portal PM- SURYA GHAR: MUFT BIJLI YOJNA PM Kusum Close Home Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyaan (PM KUSUM) Share on Facebook Share of X (formerly Twitter) Share on Linkedin Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyaan (PM KUSUM) Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyaan (PM KUSUM) Objective The PM KUSUM scheme aims to add Solar capacity of 34,800 MW by March 2026 with the total Central Financial support of ₹ 34,422 crore, including service charges to the implementing agencies. The Scheme has the following three components: Component-A: Setting up of 10,000 MW of Decentralized Ground/ Stilt Mounted Grid-Connected Solar or other Renewable Energy based Power Plants. Component-B: Installation of 14 Lakh Stand-alone Solar Agriculture Pumps. Component-C: Solarisation of 35 Lakh Grid Connected Agriculture Pumps including Feeder Level Solarization. Period Till 31.03.2026 Salient Features Component A: Renewable energy-based Power Plants (REPP) of capacity 500 kW to 2 MW, will be setup by individual farmers/group of farmers/cooperatives/panchayats/Farmer Producer Organizations (FPO)/Water User Associations (WUA) hereinafter called Renewable Power Generator (RPG). In the above specified entities are not able to arrange equity required for setting up the REPP, they can opt for developing the REPP through developer(s) or even through local DISCOM, which will be considered as RPG in this case. DISCOMs will notify sub-station wise surplus capacity which can be fed from such REPP to the Grid and shall invite applications from interested beneficiaries for setting up the solar energy plants. The solar power generated will be purchased by DISCOMs at a feed-in-tariff (FiT) determined by respective State Electricity Regulatory Commission (SERC). DISCOM would be eligible to get PBI @ Rs. 0.40 per unit purchased or Rs. 6.6 lakh per MW of capacity installed, whichever is less, for a period of five years from the Commercial Operation Date (COD). Component B: Individual farmers will be supported to install standalone solar Agriculture pumps of capacity up to 7.5 HP in off-grid areas, where grid supply is not available. CFA of 30% of the benchmark cost or the tender cast, whichever is lower, of the stand-alone solar Agriculture pump will be provided. The State Government will give at least a subsidy of 30%; and the remaining at-most 40% will be provided by the farmer. Bank finance can be availed by farmer, so that farmer has to initially pay only 10% of the cost and remaining up to 30% of the cost as loan. In North Eastern States, Sikkim, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand, Lakshadweep and A&N Islands, CFA of 50% of the benchmark cost or the tender cost, whichever is lower, of the stand-alone solar pump will be provided. The State Government will give at-least subsidy of 30%; and the remaining at-most 20% will be provided by the farmer. Further, farmers are allowed to install solar pumps with central CFA where states are not in portion to provide their state share. Component C: Individual Pump Solarisation (IPS) Individual farmers having grid connected agriculture pump will be supported to solarize pumps. Solar PV capacity up to two times of pump capacity in KW is allowed under the scheme. The farmer will be able to use the generated solar power to meet the irrigation needs and the excess solar power will be sold to DISCOMS CFA of 30% of the benchmark cost or the tender cost, whichever is lower, of the solar PV component will be provided. The State Government will give at least subsidy of 30%, and the remaining at most 40% will be provided by the farmer. Bank finance can be availed by farmer, so that farmer has to initially pay only 10% of the cost and remaining up to 30% of the cost as loan. In North Eastern States, Sikkim, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand, Lakshadweep and A&N Islands, CFA of 50% of the benchmark cost or the tender cost, whichever is lower, of the solar pump will be provided. The State Government will give at-least subsidy of 30%; and the remaining at-most 20% will be provided by the farmer. Further, farmers are allowed to install solar pumps with central CFA where states are not in portion to provide their state share. Component C: Feeder Level Solarisation (FLS) Instead of the Individual solar pumps the states can solarize the agriculture feeders. Guidelines were issued on 04.12.2020. Where agriculture feeders are not separated, loan for feeder separation may be taken from NABARD or PFC/REC. Further assistance for feeder separation may be availed from the Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS) of the Ministry of Power. However, mixed can also be solarized. Solar plants of capacity that can cater to the requirement of the agriculture load of the selected feeder can be installed through CAPEX/RESCO mode for a project period of 25 years. CFA of 30% on the cost of installation of solar power plant (up to Rs 1.05 Cr/MW) will be provided. However, the North Eastern States, Sikkim, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand, Lakshadweep, and A&N Islands 50% (upto Rs.1.75 Cr/MW) subsidy is available. The farmers will get day-time reliable power for irrigation free of cost or at tariff fixed by their respective state. How to avail the financial assistance Component A The Solar power generated will be purchased by DISCOMs at a feed-in-tariff (FiT) approved by respective State Electricity Regulatory Commission (SERC). In case the farmers/ group of farmers/ cooperatives/ panchayats/ Farmer Producer Organisations (FPO)etc. are not able to arrange equity required for setting up the SEPP, they can opt for developing the SEPP through developer(s) or even through local DISCOM, which will be considered as RPG in this case. In such a case, the land owner will get lease rent as mutually agreed between the parties. To avail of the PBI, the Implementing Agencies are requested to submit their claims for the projects which have been completed one year post their commissioning date, till 5 years from COD, along with the Signed Copy of the Joint Metering Report and Receipt of lease rent paid to the beneficiary/land-owner, wherever applicable. Component B & Component C (IPS) State-wise allocation for solar pumps and solarisation of existing grid-connected pumps will be issued by MNRE, after approval by a Screening Committee under the chairmanship of the Secretary, MNRE. On acceptance of the allocated quantity by the Implementation agencies and submission of the detailed proposal as per MNRE format, within a given time, the final sanction will be issued by MNRE Projects for solarisation or installation of pumping systems shall be completed within 24 months from the date of sanction by MNRE. Funds up to 40% of the applicable CFA for the sanctioned quantity would be released as advance to the implementing agency after placement of letter of award(s) to the selected vendors. The balance eligible CFA along with applicable service charges would be released on acceptance of the Project Completion Report in the prescribed format, Utilization Certificates as per GFR and other related documents by the Ministry. MNRE CFA and State Government’s subsidy will be adjusted in the system cost and the beneficiary will have to pay only the remaining balance. Component-C (FLS) CFA applicable under the FLS can be released in the following manner wrt CAPEX/RESCO mode of implementations of the FLS. CAPEX/RESCO CFA up to 30% of the total eligible CFA will be released to DISCOMs on completion 30% of the total work. Balance CFA will be released on the achieving of the milestones as per scheme guidelines. Whom to contact Implementation agencies under Component A, B, and C (IPS) Visiting the central Portal of the PM-KUSUM Implementing Agencies & How to Apply information Vendors and rates of the standalone solar pump information Relevant Documents Clarification regarding Component ‘C’ (FLS) of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha evam Utthan Mahabihiyaan (PM KUSUM) (29/01/2024, 312 Kb, PDF) Comprehensive guidelines for implementation of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha Evam Utthaan Mahabhiyaan (PM-KUSUM) Scheme(17/01/2024, 8.4 mb, PDF) Updated Specification and Testing procedure for the Solar Photovoltaic (SPV) Water Pumping System and Universal Solar Pump Controller (USPC) (24/03/2023, 2.6 mb, PDF) Extension of Pradhan Mantri Urja Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyaan (PM-KUSUM) (02-08-2022) (197kb, PDF) List of empaneled vendors for installation of standalone solar pumps under Component-B of PM-KUSUM Scheme under the centralized tender conducted in FY 2020-21(30-05-2022)(2 MB, PDF) Information related to Decentralized Solar Schemes implemented by MNRE (17-05-2022)(529 KB, PDF) Amendment in provisions of bank guarantees in PM-KUSUM Scheme Guidelines (17-05-2022)(299 KB, PDF) Lending Guidelines of the State Bank of India under Component-A of PM-KUSUM (04-04-2022)(2 MB, PDF) Simplification of Guidelines for the implementation of PM-KUSUM (14-12-2021)(184 KB, PDF) Lending Guidelines issued by banks for extending loans to farmersfor installation of solar power plants/ solar pumps under PM-KUSUM Scheme (01-11-2021)(8 MB, PDF) PM-KUSUM Reforms Hindi (26-04-2022)(2 MB, PDF) PM-KUSUM Reforms English (26-04-2022)(1 MB, PDF) Extension for installation of grid-connected solar power plants under Component-A of PM-KUSUM Scheme (27-08-2021)(318 KB, PDF) Installation of standalone solar pumps under Component-B of PM-KUSUM Scheme against quantities for FY 2020-21 (27-08-2021)(432 KB, PDF) Amendment in Specifications and Testing Procedure for Standalone Solar Pumps(236 KB, PDF) Guidelines for Implementation of Feeder Level Solarisation under Component-C of PM-KUSUM Scheme(409 KB, PDF) Amendments/clarifications in the implementation Guidelines of Pradhan Mantri Urja Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyaan (PM-KUSUM) Scheme (13-11-2020)(1 MB, PDF) Scale-up and expansion of Pradhan Mantri Urja Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyaan (PM-KUSUM) Scheme (09-11-2020)(1 MB, PDF) Clarification for implementation of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha evam Utthan Mahabhiyan (PM-KUSUM) Scheme (04-09-2020)(293 KB, PDF) Amendment in Guidelines for Implementation of Component-C of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyaan (PM-KUSUM) Scheme – reg(27-07-2020)(519 KB, PDF) Guidelines for innovative solar pumps (22-06-2020)(393 KB, PDF) Clarification in PM-KUSUM Guidelines dated (31-12-2019)(358 KB, PDF) Guidelines for Component-C on Solarization of existing grid-connected agricultural pumps (08-11-2019)(385 KB, PDF) Amendment in Guidelines for PM KUSUM Scheme (19-08-2019)(125 KB, PDF) Guidelines for PM KUSUM Scheme (22-07-2019)(1 MB, PDF) Administrative approval for PM KUSUM Scheme (08-03-2019)(622 KB, PDF) Feedback Visitor Summary Website Policies Contact Us Help Web Information Manager Terms and Conditions Content Owned by MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY Developed and hosted by National Informatics Centre , Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology , Government of India Last Updated: November 07, 2025 02:50 PM Certified Quality Website Go to top
