https://www.nabard.org/content1.aspx?id=602&catid=23&mid=23 | HTTP 200 | fetched at 2026-10-10T09:42:23.802Z | sha256 f4fc9b733b146ace91f93985107e4726e5a4fcf575d66962a4d96c56edc3d107 | Interest Subvention Scheme - NABARD - National Bank For Agriculture And Rural Development
Interest Subvention Scheme - NABARD - National Bank For Agriculture And Rural Development --> Home Skip to Main Content -A A +A A A A A A Sitemap Help हिन्दी National Portal National Bank For Agriculture And Rural Development --> fostering rural prosperity --> Contact us About Us Who we are What we do Board of Directors Organogram HO Departments Regional Offices DDMs/DDOs (District Offices) Subsidiaries Training Establishments Information Centre Circulars Financial Reports Model Bankable Projects Publications Case Studies Unit Cost Credit Linked Plans National Level Papers State Level Papers State Focus Paper Potential Linked Plans Statewise Scale of Finance Govt. Sponsored Schemes Interest Rates Investor Relations Act & Regulations Debarred NGOs RTI NABARD in G20 Secured Assets SARFAESI Act BASEL III Disclosure Media Room Fair Lending Practices Project Locator InfoGraphics --> Tenders Career Notices Scroll Down Interest Subvention Scheme Modified Interest Subvention Scheme The Kisan Credit Card (KCC) scheme was introduced in 1998 to provide farmers with timely and flexible credit for purchase of agricultural inputs and production needs. Over time, ISS/MISS became closely linked with KCC, and the Modified Interest Subvention Scheme is now primarily delivered through the Kisan Credit Card platform for short-term crop loans and allied activities. The Interest Subvention Scheme (ISS) for short-term agricultural credit was introduced by the Government of India through the Union Budget 2006–07 to ensure that farmers receive short-term crop loans at a concessional interest rate of 7% per annum, up to a principal amount of Rs.3 lakh. The policy came into force from Kharif 2006–07. The scheme was designed to improve the availability of timely and affordable institutional credit to farmers and reduce dependence on informal/high-cost sources of credit. Under the original framework, the Government provided 2% interest subvention to eligible lending institutions, subject to banks making short-term production credit available to farmers at 7% per annum. Shift to Modified Interest Subvention Scheme The Interest Subvention Scheme has evolved into the Modified Interest Subvention Scheme (MISS) in 2019 with the introduction of working capital loans for AH & fisheries under KCC. The scheme now covers short-term loans for crop cultivation as well as working capital requirement for allied activities such as animal husbandry, dairy, fisheries bee keeping etc, subject to the prescribed limit of Rs.3 Lakh with a sub limit of Rs.2 Lakh for allied activities. From FY 2022–23, the Government reduced the interest subvention to lending institutions from 2% to 1.5%, while continuing the concessional farmer lending rate of 7% and the 3% PRI for prompt repayment. Negotiable Warehouse Receipts In 2011–12, the Government introduced interest subvention support for small and marginal farmers against Negotiable Warehouse Receipts (NWRs) to discourage distress sale of agricultural produce immediately after harvest. Under this facility, small and marginal farmers having KCC are eligible for concessional credit for a further period of up to six months post-harvest, against e-NWRs issued for produce stored in warehouses accredited by the Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA). NABARD plays a pivotal role in the successful implementation of MISS, particularly for Cooperative Banks and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs). Under the MISS scheme, financial institutions are eligible for an interest subvention of 1.5% per annum on short-term loans up to Rs.3 lakh, provided to farmers for crop cultivation and allied activities at 7% per annum. Additionally, farmers who repay loans promptly are eligible for a further 3% prompt repayment incentive (PRI), bringing down the effective interest rate to 4% per annum. The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare (MoA&FW), Government of India, has developed an online portal called Kisan Rin Portal for submission of claims by Financial institutions (FIs) under the modified Interest Subvention Scheme (KCC-MISS) of the MoA&FW, GoI. Amount released under MISS through Kisan Rin portal Scheme Year Amount (Rs. crore) 2022-23 5766.36 2023-24 5616.95 2024-25 8350.87 2025-26 4120.51 Claims for 2024-25 and 2025-26 are still being submitted by RFIs in Kisan Rin Portal. Links for Circulars; Continuation of Modified Interest Subvention Scheme for Short Term Loans (agriculture and allied activities) during the year 2025-26 - Continuation of Modified Interest Subvention Scheme for Short Term Loans (agriculture and allied activities) during the year 2025-26 - GOVT. SPONSORED SCHEMES Farm Sector Non-Operational/Close Scheme Agricultural Debt Waiver And Debt Relief Scheme, 2008 Commercial production units of organic inputs - National Project on Organic Farming (NPOF) Dairy Entrepreneurship Development Scheme National Livestock Mission Operational Scheme Agriclinic and Agribusiness Centres Scheme Interest Subvention Scheme New Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure Scheme for Extending Financial Assistance to Sugar Mills for Enhancement and Augmentation of Ethanol Production Capacity Off Farm Sector Special Credit Linked Capital Subsidy Scheme (SCLCSS) Stand up India Quick Links Citizen's Charter Other Related Links Public Notices Grievances / Enquiry / Feedback Right to Information Glossary   Tenders Contact Us Financial Supervisory Interest Rates GOVT. Sponsored Scheme Financial Reports Publications Acts & Regulations Case Studies Warehouse Directory Investor Relations Debarred NGOs by NABARD Privacy Statement Clarifications Fraud Complaints Other NABARD Links Gender Policy of NABARD   Department of Financial Services Internal Committee   Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace Act,2013   ESMS Document For Solar Rooftop Investment Program (Tranche 3)   Follow Us National Bank For Agriculture And Rural Development Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Disclaimer © NABARD. Site By Cyfuture India Pvt Ltd. Scroll Up
