https://www.nabard.org/contentsearch.aspx?AID=251&Key=agriculture%2Bcredit | HTTP 200 | fetched at 2026-10-10T09:42:24.962Z | sha256 05ad12f8013fbf36a55b354873b1836dcf55298600298b758fd0ade08c2ad4ea | NABARD - National Bank For Agriculture And Rural Development
NABARD - National Bank For Agriculture And Rural Development --> Home Skip to Main Content -A A +A A A A A A Sitemap Help हिन्दी National Portal National Bank For Agriculture And Rural Development --> fostering rural prosperity --> Contact us About Us Who we are What we do Board of Directors Organogram HO Departments Regional Offices DDMs/DDOs (District Offices) Subsidiaries Training Establishments Information Centre Circulars Financial Reports Model Bankable Projects Publications Case Studies Unit Cost Credit Linked Plans National Level Papers State Level Papers State Focus Paper Potential Linked Plans Statewise Scale of Finance Govt. Sponsored Schemes Interest Rates Investor Relations Act & Regulations Debarred NGOs RTI NABARD in G20 Secured Assets SARFAESI Act BASEL III Disclosure Media Room Fair Lending Practices Project Locator InfoGraphics --> Tenders Career Notices Scroll Down Department of Refinance NABARD - National Bank For Agriculture And Rural Development Information required to be published under Section 4 (1) (b) of the RTI Act Sr. No Particulars Information (ii) The powers and duties of its officers and employees The officers and employees of the department discharge duties dealing with Department of Refinance such as : A) Long Term Refinance: NABARD’s long-term refinance lays emphasis on investment credit which leads to capital formation through asset creation. Capital formation in agriculture is critical to increase agriculture production and productivity, protects farmers from uncertainty due to weather, climate change and provides them a sustainable income flow. Apart from that capital formation in allied activities enables farmers to have perennial flow of income, increasing their resilience to withstand any crisis. B. Short Term refinance NABARD provides short term credit to Rural Financial Institutions to tide over and make available timely finance to farmers during the cropping season.  C. Direct Refinance Assistance (DRA) NABARD provides short-term multipurpose credit for financing directly to DCCBs and StCBs to augment their lending resources D. KCC Saturation Phase II : As a part of the Prime Minister’s package for farmers, Hon’ble Finance Minister has announced to cover 2.5 crore farmers under the second phase of KCC saturation scheme to facilitate credit to the farm sector. Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying and Department of Fisheries, GoI also decided to simultaneously launch a special drive to provide KCC to 1.5 crore dairy farmers belonging to milk unions and milk producing companies and 1 crore fish farmers.   (iii) Procedure followed in the decision making process, including channels of supervision and accountability Procedure - The policy guidelines for release of refinance are issued to client banks on an annual basis at the beginning of the year. The operational guidelines in this regard are issued by NABARD from time to time.  Related provisions, acts, rules – Regulation 11(2) of NABARD General Regulations, 1982 Accountability-  Accountability as per NABARD’s policy is followed (iv) Norms set by it for the discharge of its functions  Functions are discharged within the overall framework of rules and regulations of NABARD, guidelines received from GoI and RBI and norms/parameters prescribed in various policy circulars issued by the Department. The norms for various functions are outlined as follows: 1 Refinance- Long Term  1.1 Eligible Institutions   NABARD can give refinance assistance to Scheduled Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks, State Cooperative Banks, State Cooperative Agriculture and Rural Development Banks, District Central Cooperative Banks, Primary Urban Cooperative Banks, Small Finance Banks NBFCs/NBFC-MFIs, NABARD Subsidiaries etc. or any other financial institution, approved by Reserve Bank of India (RBI). 1.2 Eligible Purposes  NABARD provides refinance for both Farm Sector and Non - Farm Sector activities. 1.3. Quantum of Refinance   Quantum is subject to eligibility prescribed in our refinance policy from time to time 1.4 Rate of interest on refinance  Rate of interest on refinance is reviewed from time to time taking into account the cost of funds, market conditions etc. 1.5 Repayment Period Repayment period is 3 years to 5 years and above 2 Refinance- Medium Term  2.1. Eligible Institutions-    All Scheduled Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks, State Cooperative Banks, State Cooperative Agriculture and Rural Development Banks, District Central Cooperative Banks, Primary Urban Cooperative Banks, Small Finance Banks NBFCs/NBFC-MFIs, NABARD Subsidiaries etc. or any other financial institution, approved by Reserve Bank of India (RBI). 2.2 Eligible Purposes All investment activities under medium term purposes related to agriculture and allied activities are eligible.  2.3. Quantum of Refinance Quantum is subject to eligibility prescribed in our refinance policy from time to time 2.4 Rate of interest on refinance  Rate of interest on refinance is reviewed from time to time taking into account the cost of funds, market conditions etc.  2.5 Repayment period   Minimum repayment period is 18 months and maximum is 3 years  3.Long Term Rural Credit Fund: The Fund was announced by GoI in the Union Budget 2014-15 to motivate Cooperative Banks and RRBs to extend agriculture term loans to the farmers at concessional rate of interest. This fund has been constituted with an initial allocation of Rs.5000 crore. During 2024-25 an amount of Rs.8023.75 cr. has been allocated under this fund. NABARD is providing refinance facility to Cooperative Banks and RRBs out of this fund to enable them to provide agriculture term credit at concessional rate 4.Refinance-Short Term- 4.1-Short Term(Seasonal Agricultural Operations) In order to ensure availability of timely credit to farmers, production-oriented system of lending is followed by banks. The system has features like assessment of credit needs, provision of credit for purchase of inputs like fertilizers, pesticides etc. Crop-wise and district wise scales of finance are fixed and adherence to seasonality in lending and recovery is ensured. Refinance is provided for the production purpose at concessional rates of interest to RRBs and to StCBs on behalf of District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCBs) by way of sanction of annual credit limits. Each drawal against the sanctioned credit limit is repayable within 12 months.  4.2 Short Term Credit Refinance Fund: STCRC and STRRB The refinance under Seasonal Agricultural Operations (SAO) is provided from Short Term Cooperative Rural Credit Fund(STCRC) and Short Term RRB Refinance Fund (STRRB) allocated by GoI/RBI out of shortfall in priority sector lending of Scheduled Commercial Banks The fund is intended to augment resources of NABARD for extending short term (SAO) refinance to cooperatives and RRBs. The corpus of the fund is contributed by scheduled commercial banks having shortfall in achievement of priority sector target and sub-targets as decided by Reserve Bank from time to time. Accordingly, banks contribute to the corpus announced in each year's budget. NABARD supplements this fund with open market borrowing for extending ST(SAO) refinance to cooperatives and RRBs. During the year 2024-25, an amount of Rs.32,079.11 crore has been allocated under STCRC fund and Rs.7,023.74 crore under ST(RRB). 4.3 Additional ST(SAO) In view of increase in demand of the Rural Financial Banks and to help them face the liquidity constraints NABARD started a new line of credit during 2016-17 to provide Additional Short-Term refinance for (SAO) to StCBs and RRBs over and above normal ST (SAO) limit. 4.4 ST(Others) and Weavers The ST ( Others ) and Weavers limit is sanctioned to banks for providing short term credit for purposes other than those covered under ST(SAO) viz. Agriculture and Allied Activities, Marketing of crops, Fisheries Sector etc and for meeting Working Capital requirement of Primary /Apex/Regional Weavers Coop Society , State Handloom Development Corporation etc. 5. Refinance-Medium Term Conversion Refinance facility is available to StCBs and RRBs against the loans converted/ rescheduled / rephased of farmers affected by natural calamities under Medium term stabilization arrangement. The conversion facility in case of StCBs is shared by NABARD (60%), State Government(15%) and StCB (25%) and in the case of RRBs the sharing ratio is NABARD (70%), Sponsor Bank (25%) and RRBs(5%). 6. Refinance – Short Term- Direct Refinance Assistance (DRA) 6.1 Eligible Institutions The credit limit will be sanctioned to well governed and financially strong State Cooperative Banks (StCBs) and District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCBs) with ‘A’ or ‘B’ category rating as per the latest Inspection Report issued by Regional Office. Additionally, ‘C’ rated StCBs and DCCBs may also be extended credit limit under DRA if it is secured against eligible collateral security to the tune of 110% of the loan amount. 6.2 Eligible Activities The refinance assistance under DRA can be extended against loans sanctioned to individuals/agencies through branches/ PACS/ other societies for various purposes such as Working Capital requirements, Repair and maintenance of farm equipment and other productive assets, Storage/ grading/ packaging of produce, Post harvest and Marketing activities, Crop loan (if individual requirement exceeds Rs 3 lakh), Participation in National Food Credit Consortium. Credit limit to StCBs for on-lending to the DCCBs is not available under this product. 6.3. Extent of Refinance The extent of refinance assistance available from NABARD to eligible banks is up to 100% of the amount sanctioned by them for eligible purposes. The financial assistance is available from NABARD to the extent of 75% of the credit limit sanctioned by StCBs/CCBs to the sugar factory. 6.4 Nature of limit 6.4.1 Annual (with fixed and floating rates of interest upto 12 months)/ Quarterly Credit Limit (Fixed rate 90 days) 6.4.2 Credit limit sanctioned will be in the nature of cash credit accommodation and the cooperative banks may draw and repay as many times as required within 12 months from the date of sanction, provided the loan outstanding in the account does not exceed the sanctioned credit limit. 7. 7 Long Term loan to State Govt. –  Long Term Loans are provided by NABARD to State Government for contribution of share capital to cooperative credit institutions (StCBs /DCCBs/ SCARDBs /PCARDBs / PACS /FSS /LAMPS) for periods upto 12 years in order to strengthen the share capital base of these institutions and thereby increase their maximum borrowing power and enable them to undertake larger lending programmes; subject to certain conditions. 8. Kisan Credit Card- The Kisan Credit Card (KCC) scheme was introduced in 1998-99, as an innovative credit delivery mechanism that aims at adequate and timely credit support from the banking system to the farmers for their cultivation needs including the purchase of inputs in a flexible, convenient, and cost effective manner. Banks have been advised to issue Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) to all eligible farmers. The KCC Scheme has since been simplified with facilities like one-time documentation, built-in cost escalation in the limit and facility of ATM enabled debit card etc. Under the present guidelines of KCC, the limit is sanctioned for 05 years and the beneficiaries have ease and flexibility in drawal and repayment. Besides, short term Agricultural loans, KCC can also be availed to meet the working capital requirements for animal husbandary, fisheries etc. The total KCCs issued by Cooperative banks and RRBs as on 31 March 2025 was 4,81,94,483 with amount outstanding at Rs. 4,19,096.68 cr. (v) Rules, regulations, instructions, manuals and records, held by it or under its control or used by its employees for discharging its functions. The following manuals containing broad policy , procedures/rules documentation etc have been prepared for reference: (i)Short Term Manual (ii)Long Term Manual (iii)Internal and external circulars are made available to staff members on the Bank's intranet and external circulars on Bank's website (www.nabard.org) Modifications in the guidelines/operational instructions are made from time to time through issuance of circulars which are also uploaded on the website  (vi) A statement of the categories of documents that are held by it or under its control The following documentation are done for release of refinance-  Release of LT Refinance  A. General Refinance Agreement, Board Resolution- Executed by borrowing institutions and mandate for debiting their RBI/ Principal Banker’s account in case of default for all agencies. B. In case of StCBs not satisfying the prescribed norms and SCARDBs State Govt. Guarantee.  C. In the event of Govt. guarantee (wherever required) not forthcoming, alternative security like pledge of Govt. Securities or pledge of Fixed Deposit Receipts issued by scheduled banks can be considered subject to compliance with the terms and conditions stipulated by NABARD in this regard. D. Agreement for assignment / Hypothecation of book debts, delivery letter and DP Note and acknowledgement of debts/securities in case of NBFCs/NBFC-MFIs, Release of ST Refinance A. Loan Agreement, Mandate, DP note , NODC statements-by StCB/RRB B. Non-scheduled StCBs which fulfil the CRAR criteria as stipulated by NABARD from time to time will be eligible for sanction of credit limits against Government guarantee under or pledge of Govt. / approved securities and / or pledge of FDRs of Scheduled Banks. Sanction/ Release of DRA -Pre sanction processes involve loan origination, inward registry, preliminary scrutiny, credit appraisal, sanction -process including issue of sanction letter and turnaround time for pre-sanction procedures. -Post sanction processes include documentation, disbursement procedure, delegation of power for disbursement, -post disbursement procedure, penal charges, stressed asset management and preservation of records.   (vii) Particulars of any arrangement that exists for consultation with or representation by the members of the public in relation to the formulation of its policy or implementation thereof Feedback from banks, farmers, rural entrepreneurs, members of public are obtained through our district offices, meetings, workshops, studies, training programmes etc. which are taken into account in the annual review of policies/programmes as well as while framing fresh annual policies and programmes of the department.. (viii) A statement of the boards, councils, committees and other bodies consisting of two or more persons constituted as its part or for the purpose of its advice, and as to whether meetings of those boards, councils, committees and other bodies are open to the public, or the minutes of such meetings are accessible for public The policy/modalities for refinance in DoR are effected after taking approval from Board or various committees of the Board of NABARD. The meetings of the board/such committees and minutes thereof are not open to public. (ix) A directory of its officers and employees Directory of its Officers and Employees - (x) The monthly remuneration received by each of its officers and employees, including the system of compensation as provided in its regulations Click here - (xi) Budget allocated to each of its agency, indicating the particulars of all plans, proposed expenditures and reports on disbursements made Budget Allocated and Disbursements made: Long Term Refinance – Position as on 31.03.2025 Rs in crore Agency Target for 2024-25 Achievement as on 31.03.2025 Commercial Banks including SFBs 138963.00 58372.00 RRBs 24184.00 10242.15 StCBs 21246.00 12281.54 SCARDBs 3465.00 2578.41 NBFCs (including NBFC-mFI) 16878.00 11270.00 NABARD Subsidiaries (NABKISAN/ NABFINS/ NABSAMRUDDHI) 2535.00 4654.36 Loans to State Govt. 0 0 Total 207271.00 99398.46 Short Term Refinance – Position as on 31.03.2025 Rs in crore Agency Target for 2024-25 Achievement as on 31.03.2025 ST-SAO 75000.00 39102.85 StCB 75000.00 32079.11 RRB 7023.74 Total 75000.00 39102.85 Additional ST(SAO) 78248.00 102216.76 ST(Others) and Weavers 26083.00 47400.43 SFB 100.00 162.69 SLF-3 0.00 0.00 Total 179431.00 188882.73 Direct Refinance Assistance (DRA) to Co-operative Banks Rs in crore Target for 2024-25 Achievementas on 31.03.2025 23510.00 37216.62 (xii) Language in which information manual/hand book available (i) Short Term and Long Term Manuals are in English (ii) All circulars are bilingual (xiii) When was the manual/ handbook last updated  Short Term and Long Term Manuals were last updated in 2017-18 Information available in electronic form All circulars as well as relevant information is available in soft form on NABARD’s website (xiv) Particulars of facilities available to citizens for availing information organisation Grievance Redressal Mechanism exists in NABARD. The information may be sought under RTI Act by individual / agencies. (XVI) Such other information as may be prescribed under the section  All the grievances pertaining to short term and long term refinance, received through grievance redressal portal, webmaster and e-mails are replied. The information under VIP references and RTI is given. Quick Links Citizen's Charter Other Related Links Public Notices Grievances / Enquiry / Feedback Right to Information Glossary   Tenders Contact Us Financial Supervisory Interest Rates GOVT. Sponsored Scheme Financial Reports Publications Acts & Regulations Case Studies Warehouse Directory Investor Relations Debarred NGOs by NABARD Privacy Statement Clarifications Fraud Complaints Other NABARD Links Gender Policy of NABARD   Department of Financial Services Internal Committee   Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace Act,2013   ESMS Document For Solar Rooftop Investment Program (Tranche 3)   Follow Us National Bank For Agriculture And Rural Development Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Disclaimer © NABARD. Site By Cyfuture India Pvt Ltd. Scroll Up
